He used to come into my class that were sort of cheerleaders for the baseball team in those real shorts.
And I made a remark one day to them.
I wish they wouldn't come in late to class.
and disturb all the men in the class.
And after class, one young lady come up to me and said, you don't want to do that.
You want to let them do that because these young fellows here have to have some excitement.
No, no.
I've heard of problems with
the matter of women attending this, becoming a co-ed.
Because I had one young lady that—see, it happened about 65 or so, I guess.
I'm not sure the exact date.
But she lasted two years.
Just couldn't take it anymore.
And this was mainly not fellow students.
It was the profs.
Yeah.
Now, my jokes never had to change.
But some people's jokes had to change.
Oh, I hear you.
They're going from bail.
Mm-hmm.
Do, in general, the faculty that you knew best, how did they react to the admission of women?
They thought it was a good idea.
I did, too, because...
turned out most of the women that were admitted to this university were sharper and smarter than the men.
All right.
What about the faculty reaction to Voluntary Corps?
Well, I was having Voluntary Corps from the very beginning.
What did you— You see, I'm—even though I served during World War II, I'm sort of anti—
One, I don't like saluting people because that shows that I'm subservient to them.
And I don't think an American is subservient to any other American.
What did your colleagues in general think about Voluntary Corps?
Well, in our department, I think they all were for it.
And integration, racial integration.
For that too, so.
Higher admission requirements, which began in the 60s.
Well, I've sort of been reluctant on that for this reason.
When I went to Washington State University at Land Grant College, you had
the right to be admitted to that land-grant college if you were a graduate of any high school in the state, so you could be admitted to it.
When I came to A&M, the admission was essentially the same.
And so now it's even getting tough for
and Aggie to have his son or daughter admitted to this school where he wants them to go, and I... All right, let me be the devil's advocate.
How large could we allow the enrollment to become and this still be a pleasant campus?
Well, let's put it this way.
When I was here, when we had 4,000 students,
I can know more faculty than I know now, and the faculty has increased.
Yes, I know the people in my department, and some other departments we work closely with.
So, no, we're too large now.
That's what I think.
But I don't see how you can—well,
I've just been reading lately that the University of Texas is raising their admission requirements, too.
And, of course, we got a big influx higher than usual for this spring semester, so we're probably going to have to raise it again.
But I do, one of the problems that I see now is that when I came here, the
finances in this state depended mainly on the oil severance tax.
And the schools, public schools, were almost supported 100 percent except for the bond issues to build buildings.
Now, that isn't true.
You've got to have a school tax in order to make things work.
You also had a state-supported institution in Texas A&M.
And unfortunately, the administration, when I came here, was always proud to mention that they didn't use all their money and return some to
the state.
Nowadays, being a state-assisted university, I don't know—well, maybe the state provides forty to fifty percent of the funds needed to operate this place, but it isn't the same.
All right, there was very great changes made under Mr. Rutter in the 60s, and then he dies.
Do you remember how you and your colleagues felt when you heard the news that he was ill and then he died?
Well, it was pretty much of a shock to me, because I didn't expect him to die.
If you can go through a landing in D-Day and go up a cliff,
and lead a group of people and not get shot.
Then he's followed by Jack Williams.
Do you remember how you all reacted to him?
Do you remember when you first saw him or heard him?
Well, he once made a comment to me that he wished he could spend his time running the university.
instead of doing errands for people on the Board of Regents.
Did he give you an example of the kind of errands that they asked him to do?
Well, football tickets were one of them.
What kind of personality did you think Dr. Williams had?
Well, he had a very good one, one that you
In other words, you thought he was your friend when you first met him.
I agree with you entirely.
Now, Rudder still had some of the military with him.
He adjusted to the way university would run.
Eisenhower never adjusted to running Columbia University.
In other words, he thought you could order things down from the top.
Did Dr. Williams seem to understand Texas A&M?
Did you all think he did?
Well, I don't think he really understood why we have a Corps of Cadets.
Of course, that's tradition.
And that may be the only unique thing that saves this university, because I don't think we're ever going to make a top 10.
One, we don't have the assets to do it, and you've got to change the attitude of the faculty.
Did we make progress under Williams, you think?
Yeah.
Now, when did you all add the doctoral program in geology?
Back in the 60s?
Yeah, it must have been back then.
Do you remember any fight over it or hassle?
Was there any problem?
No, you didn't even have to go to a coordinating board in those days.
Fact is, I don't even know that we had to have permission from anybody in the administration to do it.
You could just go ahead and do it.
How did the department change, if at all, when it moved to the College of Geosciences?
Well, I thought the change was going to be beneficial.
I think the geology department was certainly better off in the college of engineering.
You're saying in hindsight it was?
Yeah, in hindsight.
We were all for it because this gives essentially all the earth sciences together in one group.
And I still remember M. King Hubbard coming here to be interviewed for the dean.
Where was he from?
Oh, he was with the U.S.
Geological Survey at that time.
But see, M. King is
He's a blunt speaking person and a very good researcher.
Of course, one of the first questions he asked me is, how come you aren't the director of the Water Resources Institute?
And I says, because it's over in agriculture.
He says, oh, well, that's not good.
And then, of course, he was for doing away with the Corps entirely.
So if you make that one of the conditions for coming, you're not going to—
come here.
I don't know that he wanted to come anyway.
Is that when they hired Byers?
Yeah.
Describe Dr. Byers as the dean.
Well, I already described him as the vice president, where he said he could get it done in a half a day and teach, and have the secretary.
Well, he could operate the
college the same way.
He taught.
And the secretary that he wanted
was the most experienced secretary, was the one in geology.
Unfortunately, her name was the same, Byers.
So, no way.
So, she couldn't become this.
No, I think he did a very good job.
Because you had a college to get off, and you had a college that
that had to be research-oriented.
And what was your primary research emphasis in that time?
Well, I mainly was doing with radioactivity groundwater.
I had a project for that, and then another one later on with Sandia.
That went on how many years?
Oh, total, that was only about six, seven years, because it's impossible to do that and run those summer institutes at the same time.
It took too much work.
And when I was doing both of those, I finally decided that I was no longer going to get involved
to the extent that I didn't have a home life.
In those days, I was home for breakfast, lunch, dinner, and get home about bedtime.
So I was having to spend too much time
working at the job to get it all done.
And so then I have told department heads, I am going to go out for coffee twice a day, period, and you aren't going to see me after five o'clock.
So I decided that my life was going to change.
There's other things besides academia.
Now compare the satisfactions of teaching to the satisfactions of research for you.
Teaching is more satisfying.
Running these summer institute programs is more satisfaction.
You've got to have it because you're not going to get it monetarily.
See, at one time, Travis Parker was acting head of the Department of Geology.
And at that time, outside—if you take him as a head, well, outside of being a full professor, not being a head, I was the highest paid in the college engineering.
The minute I got into it, handling teacher programs, I dropped down in relations.
So by the time that I retired, I was the lowest paid full professor in the College of Geosciences.
What should be the comparative salary of teaching and researching?
Well, the way I feel about it is people going to a university ought to be given an option, what they want to do, be research-oriented or teaching-oriented, and the salaries ought to be comparable.
But I don't—this university and all universities seem to have the tendency to swing from one extreme to the other.
Sometimes they get intermediate where everything is balanced.
You see, when I came to this place, you were penalized if you did research.
And high teaching loads even when you were doing research, trying to use the research monies to help augment teaching salaries.
And swung the other way now where
If you're doing research in our department, no one's paying for it.
The most you'll teach is one course.
You've got to go get the research money outside.
There was a comment that one of our staff members made to me when I pointed out at this induction of me into the Science Hall of Fame that my
My one granddaughter, they wanted a picture with H. Ross Perot.
So H. Ross Perot grabbed my wife and me and got us all in this little group where the picture was taken.
I said, yes, I shook his hand.
And the staff member said, did he give me any money?
I said, no.
But I said, that is what the university would be concerned about.
As in the College of Geosciences, did any of the deans attempt to equalize this research and teaching emphasis?
No.
As you, I'm not gonna ask you the negative, as you look back on the now almost 30 years of the College of Geoscience, to what dean or deans would you give the highest mark?
I'm not gonna ask you the lowest mark.
Who did the best job, or best jobs?
Probably Byers.
Is that right?
Why was he better?
What did he do that was better?
Well, I think he understood
what his problem was in getting a new college started and getting it sort of integrated.
From our department, the deans that have been from our department have always been over backwards to treat the other departments better.
So you're saying it didn't help geology to have a geologist as the dean.
That's right.
In the years, all of your years, who has done the best job as department head?
I had to think about that a lot.
Well, probably the one that, the latest one, Rabinowitz, has done a pretty good job.
And the reason is that he had to integrate two departments, geology and geophysics.
See, actually, geophysics started off by just being in the geology department.
And there wasn't a separate department, so now it's—it was the Department of Geology, and now it's the Department of Geology and Geophysics.
I'd probably say the best faculty member I've ever seen in geology and geophilics was probably Dehlinger.
It's D-E-H-L-I-N-G-E-R?
Yeah, Peter Dalinger.
He's been dead now about five years.
What was his specialty?
Geophysics and he...
introduced the use of a gravity meter that is now generally used.
Except he didn't stay here but about five or six years and then moved to Oregon State and then moved to the Office of Naval Research and then moved up to University of Connecticut where he started a
Department of Oceanography, because essentially he was associated with geophysics of ocean basins.
And of course, he was the head of the new college they started up there.
No, I think Shirley Lynch probably was a darn good department head for his day, because he was teaching-oriented, not research-oriented.
What the department, did it have any, did it earn a reputation for being particularly good in this and this and this among other, if we talked to other geology department people across the country, what would they say was A&M's strengths?
Well, his strength was petroleum geology, but it no longer is.
Should it be again?
Well, we're in the middle of the oil patch, but oil patch there is left.
Should A&M try to return to that as a specialty?
I'm not so sure, because the departments that are rated the best probably don't produce any petroleum geologists at all.
Really?
See, the only one that's up there, what you're looking at in terms of geology is Caltech, and if you're geology and geophysics, MIT, Harvard, and that type of situation.
So, those people are in the
They get research grants and all of that.
And so essentially, we're not ever going to be near there.
Therefore, the way I look at this, since we're not going to be in the top 10 and unique in that way, we ought to use some of our traditions to be unique.
Such as?
If you have the bonfire and build it correctly, I've been against the bonfire for a long time because I think all of that wood could have been cut up and used to give to the poor to heat with.
But you do need it because it is an engineering structure approved by an engineer, and this is why those people that were trying to get
one set up outside the university and didn't have success is because there's going to be very few engineers that want a bonfire built that they're going to stake their license on.
And it needs to be
designed by a licensed engineer, and it needs to be built the way it's designed.
This thing really got topsy-turvy here.
What else in geology could and should A&M do?
Well, right now I think our top programs are environmental and engineering, engineering, geology.
See, occasionally petroleum comes back in and petroleum companies are hiring again, but gosh, most of the oil is produced overseas now.
See,
During World War II, we supplied the Allies with all the fuel.
And this is one thing I remember about the British.
Come Christmas and Boxing Day, be sure you have all the gasoline you need on base, because there's going to be no deliveries, even during the war.
Because those people still tried to live a reasonable, normal life.
A little difficult to do, but they made every attempt to do it.
And I have a great admiration for them.
Progress that the department made began to attract some international students, share some experiences of what it was like in the real world of teaching and research to have more international students here.
Geophysics gets more of those than geology does.
We had a program where we brought people in in geology for a year from Russia and then from—the president group here is from Aberdeer, however that foreign name goes.
But they have to aim for the specific thing that they are weak in because
and also the American way of doing things, because other people do things differently.
One of the problems with Arabs is that any means is a legitimate means to arrive
at a grade or something else.
Did you ever have many international students in your classes?
No, never have.
But this is just what I've heard.
Who were some of the notable colleagues that were brought in during your experience in geology?
You mentioned a couple of them.
Are there any others?
Bob Berg, he was brought in.
He, well Berg was probably one of the better department heads.
Who were the best teachers in the department?
Parker was, he got the award.
Travis Parker?
Yeah, he got one of the first teaching awards.
And what was, as far as you know, what was good about his teaching?
What made him a good teacher?
Well, the students thought he was.
No, no, I know, but what did they like about him?
Well, I don't really know, because I never did listen to, sit in a lecture, no, listen to it.
When you had any of his students in a follow-up course, were they always well prepared?
Was his good?
But generally, he was getting my students.
Oh, okay.
So he got yours.
All right.
Was there a... Who taught the big introductory sections?
Well, in those days,
Almost anybody would get assigned and make up a teaching loan.
So, and generally there are only one or two sections, but now since it's part of the core curriculum, it's the only thing that makes the department survive.
Ah.
About how big are those sections now?
Roughly, we'll have a class of, the lecture room will hold 188, so normally there'd be about 180 in that.
These are freshmen and sophomores taking it?
Yeah, and essentially
Well, I guess we teach about 2,000 students a year, so it makes a very large impact.
So, if you do a lousy job in teaching in there, you're going to lose students.
So, some of the, I'd say some of the teachers in there doing an excellent job probably
Believe it or not, one of our deans probably does a better occasion.
He teaches Geology 101.
Who's that?
Giordino.
Oh.
Graduate studies.
Mm-hmm.
They keep changing that around, director and then dean and director, so you never know what the title is going to be.
The, who, nationally, who would have been the most
well-known researchers in the department in the last 20 years or so?
Handon.
Who?
John Handon.
His specialty.
Rock mechanics.
And of course John here came from Shell.
He was already established when he came.
And that probably did more for the department in changing the way the department operated than anyone else.
See, that's what they really need to do now is to go out and get a holder of—see, we've got a bunch of vacant chairs, but the problem is with vacant chairs, you've got to have state money also.
Because you can't provide more than—even with a million-dollar chair, you can only provide about half the resources.